8.13 release notes (#4869)
elastic/security-docs: docs/release-notes/8.13.asciidoc

[[release-notes-header-8.13.0]]
== 8.13

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.13.0]]
=== 8.13.0

[discrete]
[[features-8.13.0]]
==== Features

* Allows you to define an entity's (such as a host's or user's) `Asset criticality`, which can affect risk scores ({pull}176815[#176815], {pull}176294[#176294], {pull}172417[#172417], {pull}176056[#176056]).
* Information on the Data Quality dashboard now persists in {elastic-sec} rather than disappearing after each session ({pull}175673[#175673], {pull}173185[#173185]).

> * Adds line-by-line diffs to the rules upgrade flyout so you can see what's changed between versions ({pull}174564[#174564]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds field-by-field diffs to the rules upgrade flyout so you can see what's changed between versions ({pull}174564[#174564]).
```

* Adds alert suppression to the Indicator Match rule type ({pull}174241[#174241]).

> 

Reviewer: This adds a few features from the EDR Workflows team:
```suggestion
* You can add Elastic Defend’s `kill-process` or `suspend-process` response actions to detection rules to automatically terminate or suspend a process on an affected host ({pull}161645[#161645]).
* You can isolate and release a SentinelOne-protected host from detection alerts and the response console, and view third-party actions in the response actions history log ({pull}173927[#173927], {pull}175810[#175810]).

```

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.13.0]]
==== Enhancements

* Adds a date and dataview selector to Analyzer regardless of where it appears in {elastic-sec} ({pull}176364[#176364]).

> * Enables the newly expanded Host and User details flyouts by default ({pull}175899[#175899]).

Reviewer 2: We could expand to something like this:
```suggestion
* Enables the newly expanded host and user details flyouts, which allow you to view host or user details, risk data and inputs, and asset criticality ({pull}175899[#175899]).
```

* Updates the Alert details flyout's header UI ({pull}175075[#175075]).

> * Improves the UI for information panels appearing in Analyzer ({pull}172397[#172397]).

Reviewer 3: @christineweng let me know if the following summary works, or if you'd prefer to focus on a particular change in the PR (e.g., the inline actions and search bar).

```suggestion
* Adds inline actions and a search bar to the left panel in the event analyzer UI and improves formatting issues ({pull}172397[#172397]).
```

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.13.0]]
==== Bug fixes

> * Fixes a bug that could prevent Analyzer from properly displaying particular alerts ({pull}178389[#178389]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the event analyzer from properly displaying particular alerts ({pull}178389[#178389]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that meant you couldn't edit, add, or remove filters to a custom rule ({pull}178207[#178207]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that prevents you from editing, adding, or removing query filters when creating or editing a custom query, indicator match, or new terms rule ({pull}178207[#178207]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that caused error messages to appear on the MITRE ATT&CK Coverage Overview dashboard ({pull}178126[#178126]).

Reviewer 3: Seems like the PR removed the validation check that created unnecessary errors.

```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that caused unexpected error messages to appear on the MITRE ATT&CK Coverage Overview dashboard ({pull}178126[#178126]).
```

* Prevents an infinite loading state on the Add Rules page for users with limited permissions ({pull}178005[#178005]).
* Fixes a bug that prevented the **Reset Fields** action on the Alerts table from resetting the table's columns ({pull}177986[#177986]).
* Fixes a bug that interfered with the rule filtering interface when you opened it from specific parts of {elastic-sec} ({pull}177946[#177946]).

> * Adds translated versions of risk score preview table columns ({pull}177680[#177680]).

Reviewer 3: Can we simplify this further? Maybe something like:

```suggestion
* Ensures that text within the risk score preview table translates correctly ({pull}177680[#177680]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that could prevent the correct value of the `kibana.alert.threshold_result.terms.value` field from appearing in the Alert details flyout ({pull}177472[#177472]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the correct `kibana.alert.threshold_result.terms.value` field value from appearing in the alert details flyout ({pull}177472[#177472]).
```

> * Fixes multiple bugs affecting the rule filters UI in the Create rule interface ({pull}177081[#177081]).

Reviewer 3: @yara and @e40pud are 177081 and 178207 related? If they are, can we combine the summaries into a single one?

Reviewer 4: @nastasha-solomon These are fixes of different bugs

Reviewer 3: Gotcha - thanks, @banderror! I'll keep the summaries separate and resolve this thread.

* Updates the alert assignment UI to make its data model and intended usage clearer ({pull}176442[#176442]).

> * Fixes rule overwrite behavior when importing new rules. Now, when a new rule overwrites an existing rule, even when the two rules have different fields, the old rule's fields are not included in the new rule ({pull}176166[#176166]).

Reviewer 3: Slight reordering suggestion for readability.

```suggestion
* Fixes rule overwrite behavior when importing new rules. Now, when a new rule overwrites an existing rule, the old rule's fields are not included in the new rule, even when the two rules have different fields ({pull}176166[#176166]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that allowed you to favorite a timeline before it was saved ({pull}175161[#175161]).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that allowed you to favorite a Timeline before it was saved ({pull}175161[#175161]).
```

* Fixes a bug that prevented the **Reset Fields** action on the Alerts table from resetting the table's columns ({pull}177986[#177986]).
* Fixes a bug that interfered with the rule filtering interface when you opened it from specific parts of {elastic-sec} ({pull}177946[#177946]).
* Ensures that text within the risk score preview table translates correctly ({pull}177680[#177680]).
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the correct `kibana.alert.threshold_result.terms.value` field value from appearing in the alert details flyout ({pull}177472[#177472]).
* Fixes multiple bugs affecting the rule filters UI in the Create rule interface ({pull}177081[#177081]).
* Updates the alert assignment UI to make its data model and intended usage clearer ({pull}176442[#176442]).
* Fixes rule overwrite behavior when importing new rules. Now, when a new rule overwrites an existing rule, the old rule's fields are not included in the new rule, even when the two rules have different fields ({pull}176166[#176166]).
* Fixes a bug that allowed you to favorite a Timeline before it was saved ({pull}175161[#175161]).

> * Fixes a bug that could result in an unnecessary negative sign in the risk score table that appears in the expandable user and host flyouts ({pull}177015[#177015]).

Reviewer 3: Adding one more DE team PR that was merged into 7.17.19 and 8.13.0.
 
```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could result in an unnecessary negative sign in the risk score table that appears in the expandable user and host flyouts ({pull}177015[#177015]).
* Adds file and size constraints to value lists ({pull}176074[#176074]).
```

[[release-notes-header-8.13.0]]
== 8.13

[discrete]
[[release-notes-8.13.0]]
=== 8.13.0

[discrete]
[[features-8.13.0]]
==== Features

* Allows you to define an entity's (such as a host's or user's) `Asset criticality`, which can affect risk scores ({kibana-pull}176815[#176815], {kibana-pull}176294[#176294], {kibana-pull}172417[#172417], {kibana-pull}176056[#176056]).

> * Information on the Data Quality dashboard now persists in {elastic-sec} rather than disappearing after each session ({kibana-pull}175673[#175673], {kibana-pull}173185[#173185]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Allows information on the Data Quality dashboard to now persist in {elastic-sec} rather than disappearing after each session ({kibana-pull}175673[#175673], {kibana-pull}173185[#173185]).
```

* Adds field-by-field diffs to the rules upgrade flyout so you can see what's changed between versions ({kibana-pull}174564[#174564]).

> * Adds alert suppression to the Indicator Match rule type ({kibana-pull}174241[#174241]).

Reviewer 6: 👍🏽

* You can add Elastic Defend’s `kill-process` or `suspend-process` response actions to detection rules to automatically terminate or suspend a process on an affected host ({kibana-pull}161645[#161645]).

> * You can isolate and release a SentinelOne-protected host from detection alerts and the response console, and view third-party actions in the response actions history log ({kibana-pull}173927[#173927], {kibana-pull}175810[#175810]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Allows you to isolate and release a SentinelOne-protected host from detection alerts and the response console, and view third-party actions in the response actions history log ({kibana-pull}173927[#173927], {kibana-pull}175810[#175810]).
```

* Allows you to enable and disable cloud security Benchmark rules ({pull}174575[#174575]).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.13.0]]
==== Enhancements

* Enables advanced sorting and customization options for the the Findings page's **Vulnerabilities** table ({pull}174413[#174413]).
* Adds the ability to analyze an event within a specific time range and data view ({pull}176364[#176364]).
* Enables the newly expanded Host and User details flyouts by default ({pull}175899[#175899]).
* Improves the header layout in the alert details flyout so basic alert details are better organized ({pull}175075[#175075]).
* Adds inline actions and a search bar to the left panel in the event analyzer UI and improves formatting issues ({pull}172397[#172397]).

[discrete]

> [[bug-fixes-8.13.0]]

Reviewer 7: I think we're missing the following item: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/178537 (merged yesterday)

Reviewer 8: Ya sounds good. Sorry about the late merge, it's been on auto merge since last Wednesday and only unrelated tests were failing

Reviewer 8: @nastasha-solomon @PhilippeOberti actually this backport pr has been failing, and seeing how the last BC is being built sometime today, I think we should delay this until 13.1 at this point.

==== Bug fixes

> * Fixes a bug that could prevent the event analyzer from properly displaying particular alerts ({pull}178389[#178389]).

Reviewer 9: I would specify this is for the analyzer preview in the flyout rather than the analyzer itself. @christineweng do you think this should be re-worded?

Reviewer 10: yes, I would suggest rewording such as
```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that the analyzer preview does not load properly for ES|QL rules ({pull}178389[#178389]).
```

Reviewer 3: Would this work:

```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the event analyzer preview from properly displaying event details ({pull}178389[#178389]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that prevents you from editing, adding, or removing query filters when creating or editing a custom query, indicator match, or new terms rule ({kibana-pull}178207[#178207]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that prevented you from editing, adding, or removing query filters when creating or editing a custom query, indicator match, or new terms rule ({kibana-pull}178207[#178207]).
```

* Prevents an infinite loading state on the Add Rules page for users with limited permissions ({kibana-pull}178005[#178005]).
* Fixes a bug that prevented the **Reset Fields** action on the Alerts table from resetting the table's columns ({kibana-pull}177986[#177986]).
* Fixes a bug that interfered with the rule filtering interface when you opened it from specific parts of {elastic-sec} ({kibana-pull}177946[#177946]).
* Ensures that text within the risk score preview table translates correctly ({kibana-pull}177680[#177680]).
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the correct `kibana.alert.threshold_result.terms.value` field value from appearing in the alert details flyout ({kibana-pull}177472[#177472]).
* Fixes multiple bugs affecting the rule filters on the rule details page ({kibana-pull}177081[#177081]).
* Updates the alert assignment UI to make its data model and intended usage clearer ({kibana-pull}176442[#176442]).
* Fixes rule overwrite behavior when importing new rules. Now, when a new rule overwrites an existing rule, the new rule completely replaces all the fields of the old one, and the old rule's fields are never included in the new rule ({kibana-pull}176166[#176166]).

> * Fixes a bug that allowed you to favorite a Timeline before it was saved ({kibana-pull}175161[#175161]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that allowed you to add a Timeline as a favorite before it was saved ({kibana-pull}175161[#175161]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that could result in an unnecessary negative sign in the risk score table that appears in the expandable user and host flyouts ({kibana-pull}177015[#177015]).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could result in an unnecessary negative sign in the risk score table within the expandable user and host flyouts ({kibana-pull}177015[#177015]).
```

* You can isolate and release a SentinelOne-protected host from detection alerts and the response console, and view third-party actions in the response actions history log ({pull}173927[#173927], {pull}175810[#175810]).
* Allows you to enable and disable cloud security Benchmark rules ({pull}174575[#174575]).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.13.0]]
==== Enhancements

* Enables advanced sorting and customization options for the the Findings page's **Vulnerabilities** table ({pull}174413[#174413]).
* Adds the ability to analyze an event within a specific time range and data view ({pull}176364[#176364]).
* Enables the newly expanded host and user details flyouts, which allow you to view host or user details, risk data and inputs, and asset criticality ({pull}175899[#175899]).
* Improves the header layout in the alert details flyout so basic alert details are better organized ({pull}175075[#175075]).
* Adds inline actions and a search bar to the left panel in the event analyzer UI and improves formatting issues ({pull}172397[#172397]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.13.0]]
==== Bug fixes

> * Fixes a bug in Timeline that prevented events from being unpinned after their associated notes were deleted ({pull}178537[#178537]).

Reviewer 3: Will need to remove this PR based on Kevin's comment [here](https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/4869#discussion_r1534326250).

```suggestion

```

* Fixes a bug that prevented the event analyzer preview from loading properly for {esql} rules ({pull}178389[#178389]).
* Fixes a bug that prevents you from editing, adding, or removing query filters when creating or editing a custom query, indicator match, or new terms rule ({pull}178207[#178207]).

> * Fixes a bug that caused unnecessary error messages to appear on the MITRE ATT&CK Coverage Overview dashboard ({pull}178126[#178126]).

Reviewer 4: Nit: those error messages would appear not in the UI of the MITRE ATT&CK Coverage page itself, but in the console logs of the Kibana server.

Also, @approksiu asked to avoid calling this page a "dashboard". It's not under the Dashboards menu and it's called `MITRE ATT&CK Coverage` in the UI:

<img width="996" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-21 at 15 26 10" src="https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/assets/7359339/0aaae3a4-2d60-4209-9c68-619737c0d675">

```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that caused unnecessary error messages to appear in Kibana server logs when using the MITRE ATT&CK® Coverage page ({pull}178126[#178126]).
```

* Prevents an infinite loading state on the Add Rules page for users with limited permissions ({pull}178005[#178005]).
* Fixes a bug that prevented the **Reset Fields** action on the Alerts table from resetting the table's columns ({pull}177986[#177986]).
* Fixes a bug that interfered with the rule filtering interface when you opened it from specific parts of {elastic-sec} ({pull}177946[#177946]).
* Ensures that text within the risk score preview table translates correctly ({pull}177680[#177680]).
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the correct `kibana.alert.threshold_result.terms.value` field value from appearing in the alert details flyout ({pull}177472[#177472]).

> * Fixes multiple bugs affecting the rule filters UI in the Create rule interface ({pull}177081[#177081]).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Fixes multiple bugs affecting the rule filters UI on the Rule Details page ({pull}177081[#177081]).
```

Reviewer 3: Minor capitalization changes:

```suggestion
* Fixes multiple bugs affecting the rule filters on the rule details page ({pull}177081[#177081]).
```

* Updates the alert assignment UI to make its data model and intended usage clearer ({pull}176442[#176442]).

> * Fixes rule overwrite behavior when importing new rules. Now, when a new rule overwrites an existing rule, the old rule's fields are not included in the new rule, even when the two rules have different fields ({pull}176166[#176166]).

Reviewer 4: Nit: this would be a bit easier to understand for my technical brain, but I'm fine to keep it as is too:

```suggestion
* Fixes rule overwrite behavior when importing new rules. Now, when a new rule overwrites an existing rule, the new rule completely replaces all the fields of the old one, and the old rule's fields are never included in the new rule ({pull}176166[#176166]).
```
